no title
2 | THE CHEMICAL FOUNDATION OF LIFE
Figure 2.1 Atoms are the building blocks of molecules found in the universe-air, soil, water, rocks . . . and also the cells of all living organisms. In this model of an organic molecule, the atoms of carbon (black), hydrogen (white), nitrogen (blue), oxygen (red), and sulfur (yellow) are shown in proportional atomic size. The silver rods indicate chemical bonds. (credit: modification of work by Christian Guthier)
Chapter Outline
2.1: Atoms, Isotopes, Ions, and Molecules: The Building Blocks
2.2: Water
2.3: Carbon
Introduction
2.1 | Atoms, Isotopes, Ions, and Molecules: The Building Blocks
By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Define matter and elements • Describe the interrelationship between protons, neutrons, and electrons • Compare the ways in which electrons can be donated or shared between atoms • Explain the ways in which naturally occurring elements combine to create molecules, cells, tissues, organ systems, and organisms
Approximate Percentage of Elements in Living Organisms (Humans) Compared to the Non-living World
Element Life (Humans) Atmosphere Earth's Crust
Oxygen (O) 65% 21% 46%
Carbon (C) 18% trace trace
Hydrogen (H) 10% trace 0.1%
Nitrogen (N) 3% 78% trace
Table 2.1
The Structure of the Atom
Protons, Neutrons, and Electrons
Charge Mass (amu) Location
Proton +1 1 nucleus
Neutron 0 1 nucleus
Electron -1 0 orbitals
Table 2.2
Atomic Number and Mass
Figure 2.3 Carbon has an atomic number of six, and two stable isotopes with mass numbers of twelve and thirteen, respectively. Its relative atomic mass is 12.011 How many neutrons do carbon-12 and carbon-13 have, respectively?
Isotopes
Carbon Dating
After approximately 5,730 years, half of the starting concentration of 14C will have been converted back to 14N. The time it takes for half of the original concentration of an isotope to decay back to its more stable
Figure 2.4 The age of carbon-containing remains less than about 50,000 years old, such as this pygmy mammoth, can be determined using carbon dating. (credit: Bill Faulkner, NPS)
To learn more about atoms, isotopes, and how to tell one isotope from another, visit this site (http://openstaxcollege.org/ l/atoms_isotopes) and run the simulation.
The Periodic Table
Figure 2.5 The periodic table shows the atomic mass and atomic number of each element. The atomic number appears above the symbol for the element and the approximate atomic mass appears below it.
Electron Shells and the Bohr Model
Electron Orbitals
Figure 2.8 The s subshells are shaped like spheres. Both the 1n and 2n principal shells have an s orbital, but the size of the sphere is larger in the 2n orbital. Each sphere is a single orbital. p subshells are made up of three dumbbell-shaped orbitals. Principal shell 2n has a p subshell, but shell 1 does not.
Watch this visual animation (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/orbitals) to see the spatial arrangement of the p and s orbitals.
Chemical Reactions and Molecules
Figure 2.9 Two or more atoms may bond with each other to form a molecule. When two hydrogens and an oxygen share electrons via covalent bonds, a water molecule is formed.
2H + O → H2 O
2H2 O2 (hydrogen peroxide) → 2H2 O (water) + O2 (oxygen)
Figure 2.10 The oxygen atoms in an O2 molecule are joined by a double bond.
HCO3− + H+ ↔ H2 CO3
HCO3− + H+ ↔ H2 CO3 ↔ CO2 + H2 O
Ions and Ionic Bonds
Figure 2.11 In the formation of an ionic compound, metals lose electrons and nonmetals gain electrons to achieve an octet.
Covalent Bonds and Other Bonds and Interactions
View this short video (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/ionic_covalent) to see an animation of ionic and covalent bonding.
Polar Covalent Bonds
Nonpolar Covalent Bonds
Hydrogen Bonds and Van Der Waals Interactions
Pharmaceutical Chemist
2.2 | Water
By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Describe the properties of water that are critical to maintaining life • Explain why water is an excellent solvent • Provide examples of water's cohesive and adhesive properties • Discuss the role of acids, bases, and buffers in homeostasis
Water's Polarity
Figure 2.13 Oil and water do not mix. As this macro image of oil and water shows, oil does not dissolve in water but forms droplets instead. This is due to it being a nonpolar compound. (credit: Gautam Dogra).
Water's States: Gas, Liquid, and Solid
Figure 2.14 Hydrogen bonding makes ice less dense than liquid water. The (a) lattice structure of ice makes it less dense than the freely flowing molecules of liquid water, enabling it to (b) float on water. (credit a: modification of work
by Jane Whitney, image created using Visual Molecular Dynamics (VMD) software [1]
; credit b: modification of work by Carlos Ponte)
Click here (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/ice_lattice2) to see a 3-D animation of the structure of an ice lattice. (Image
credit: Jane Whitney. Image created using Visual Molecular Dynamics VMD software. [2]
)
Water's High Heat Capacity
Water's Heat of Vaporization
1. W. Humphrey W., A. Dalke, and K. Schulten, "VMD-Visual Molecular Dynamics," Journal of Molecular Graphics 14 (1996): 33-38. 2. W. Humphrey W., A. Dalke, and K. Schulten, "VMD-Visual Molecular Dynamics," Journal of Molecular Graphics 14 (1996): 33-38.
Water's Solvent Properties
Water's Cohesive and Adhesive Properties
Figure 2.16 The weight of the needle is pulling the surface downward; at the same time, the surface tension is pulling it up, suspending it on the surface of the water and keeping it from sinking. Notice the indentation in the water around the needle. (credit: Cory Zanker)
Figure 2.17 Capillary action in a glass tube is caused by the adhesive forces exerted by the internal surface of the glass exceeding the cohesive forces between the water molecules themselves. (credit: modification of work by Pearson-Scott Foresman, donated to the Wikimedia Foundation)
Figure 2.18 Water's cohesive and adhesive properties allow this water strider (Gerris sp.) to stay afloat. (credit: Tim Vickers)
pH, Buffers, Acids, and Bases
H2 O13I46 ↔ H+ 13aq46+ OH- 13aq46
to 6.02 x 1023 particles of the substance. Therefore, 1 mole of water is equal to 6.02 x 1023 water molecules. The pH is
Figure 2.19 The pH scale measures the concentration of hydrogen ions (H+) in a solution. (credit: modification of work by Edward Stevens)
Watch this video (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/pH_scale) for a straightforward explanation of pH and its logarithmic scale.
So how can organisms whose bodies require a near-neutral pH ingest acidic and basic substances (a human drinking orange
Figure 2.20 This diagram shows the body's buffering of blood pH levels. The blue arrows show the process of raising pH as more CO2 is made. The purple arrows indicate the reverse process: the lowering of pH as more bicarbonate is
To learn more about water. Visit the U.S. Geological Survey Water Science for Schools (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/ all_about_water) All About Water! website.
2.3 | Carbon
By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Explain why carbon is important for life • Describe the role of functional groups in biological molecules
Hydrocarbons
Figure 2.21 Methane has a tetrahedral geometry, with each of the four hydrogen atoms spaced 109.5° apart.
Hydrocarbon Chains
Hydrocarbon Rings
Figure 2.23 Carbon can form five-and six membered rings. Single or double bonds may connect the carbons in the ring, and nitrogen may be substituted for carbon.
Isomers
 Saturated fats are a solid at room temperature and usually of animal origin.
Figure 2.25 These space-filling models show a cis (oleic acid) and a trans (eliadic acid) fatty acid. Notice the bend in the molecule cause by the cis configuration.
Enantiomers
Figure 2.26 D-alanine and L-alanine are examples of enantiomers or mirror images. Only the L-forms of amino acids are used to make proteins.
Functional Groups
phospholipids. This carboxyl group ionizes to release hydrogen ions (H+) from the COOH group resulting in the negatively
Figure 2.27 The functional groups shown here are found in many different biological molecules.
Figure 2.28 Hydrogen bonds connect two strands of DNA together to create the double-helix structure.
acid adhesion aliphatic hydrocarbon anion aromatic hydrocarbon atom atomic mass atomic number balanced chemical equation
base
buffer calorie capillary action
cation chemical bond chemical reaction chemical reactivity cohesion
compound covalent bond
dissociation
electrolyte electron
electron configuration
electron orbital
electron transfer
KEY TERMS
molecule that donates hydrogen ions and increases the concentration of hydrogen ions in a solution attraction between water molecules and other molecules hydrocarbon consisting of a linear chain of carbon atoms negative ion that is formed by an atom gaining one or more electrons hydrocarbon consisting of closed rings of carbon atoms the smallest unit of matter that retains all of the chemical properties of an element calculated mean of the mass number for an element's isotopes total number of protons in an atom statement of a chemical reaction with the number of each type of atom equalized for both the products and reactants molecule that donates hydroxide ions or otherwise binds excess hydrogen ions and decreases the concentration of hydrogen ions in a solution
substance composed of molecules consisting of atoms of at least two different elements type of strong bond formed between two of the same or different elements; forms when electrons are shared between atoms
release of an ion from a molecule such that the original molecule now consists of an ion and the charged remains of the original, such as when water dissociates into H+ and OH-ion necessary for nerve impulse conduction, muscle contractions and water balance negatively charged subatomic particle that resides outside of the nucleus in the electron orbital; lacks functional mass and has a negative charge of -1 unit
movement of electrons from one element to another; important in creation of ionic bonds electronegativity
element
enantiomers
equilibrium evaporation
functional group geometric isomer
heat of vaporization of water hydrocarbon hydrogen bond
hydrophilic hydrophobic inert gas ion ionic bond irreversible chemical reaction isomers isotope law of mass action
litmus paper
mass number matter molecule neutron noble gas nonpolar covalent bond
group of atoms that provides or imparts a specific function to a carbon skeleton isomer with similar bonding patterns differing in the placement of atoms alongside a double covalent bond
high amount of energy required for liquid water to turn into water vapor molecule that consists only of carbon and hydrogen weak bond between slightly positively charged hydrogen atoms to slightly negatively charged atoms in other molecules
type of covalent bond that forms between atoms when electrons are shared equally between them
core of an atom; contains protons and neutrons octet rule orbital organic molecule periodic table
pH paper pH scale polar covalent bond
product proton radioisotope reactant reversible chemical reaction
solvent specific heat capacity
sphere of hydration
structural isomers substituted hydrocarbon
surface tension
reaction that functions bi-directionally, where products may turn into reactants if their concentration is great enough substance capable of dissolving another substance the amount of heat one gram of a substance must absorb or lose to change its temperature by one degree Celsius
when a polar water molecule surrounds charged or polar molecules thus keeping them dissolved and in solution
molecules that share a chemical formula but differ in the placement of their chemical bonds hydrocarbon chain or ring containing an atom of another element in place of one of the backbone carbons
tension at the surface of a body of liquid that prevents the molecules from separating; created by the attractive cohesive forces between the molecules of the liquid outermost shell of an atom very weak interaction between molecules due to temporary charges attracting atoms that are very close together
CHAPTER SUMMARY
2.3 Carbon
ART CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1. Figure 2.3 How many neutrons do carbon-12 and carbon-13 have, respectively?
2. Figure 2.7 An atom may give, take, or share electrons with another atom to achieve a full valence shell, the most stable electron configuration. Looking at this figure, how many electrons do elements in group 1 need to lose in order to achieve a stable electron configuration? How many electrons do elements in groups 14 and 17 need to gain to achieve a stable configuration?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
a. shells 1 and 2 are full, and shell 3 has nine electrons
b. shells 1, 2 and 3 are full and shell 4 has three electrons
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
